--C1--

US vows deeper ties with China after 60 years of communist rule

(AFP) -- 1 hour ago

WASHINGTON -- US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Thursday congratulated China on the 60th anniversary of communist rule, vowing to continue deepening US ties with the increasingly powerful nation.

"I would like to extend warm wishes and congratulations to the People's Republic of China on the 60th anniversary of its founding on October 1," Clinton said in a statement released by her staff.

"In the last 30 years, China has undergone an extraordinary economic transformation, lifting millions of people out of poverty. This is truly an historic accomplishment," she added.

Clinton, who recalled it is also the 30th year of US diplomatic ties with the communist government in Beijing, vowed to pursue efforts by President Barack Obama's administration to build stronger ties.

"We are committed to building a positive, cooperative and comprehensive relationship that reflects the deepening ties between our two countries and enhances the security and prosperity of all our people," she said.

Given China's growing international clout, Washington and Beijing have forged a strategic dialogue focused on economic and political issues as well as counterterrorism.

In another sign of its growing importance, China was one of the four countries Clinton visited in February on her first overseas trip as secretary of state.

In Beijing on February 22, she called on Chinese authorities to continue buying US Treasuries, saying it would help jumpstart the flagging US economy and stimulate imports of Chinese goods.

--C2--

China marks 60 years of communism

(UKPA) 28 minutes

Tanks and other heavy weaponry rumbled across Beijing behind goose-stepping troops as China celebrated 60 years of communist rule with its biggest-ever military review - a symbol of its rapidly expanding global might.

The elaborate ceremony for the founding of the People's Republic unfolded on national television but behind tight security that excluded ordinary people from getting near the parade route through Tiananmen Square.

Precisely choreographed, the two-and-half-hour event hewed closely to tradition. President Hu Jintao, in a Mao jacket instead of a business suit, rode in an open top Red Flag limousine to review the thousands of troops.

A parade of kitschy floats, flanked by more than 100,000 people, lauded the communist revolution and the Beijing Olympics. Even the weather cooperated, with aggressive cloud-seeding by the government having brought overnight showers to disperse smog and bring in blue skies.

The biggest difference was the weaponry, more than had been shown before and most of which was domestically produced: dozens of fighter jets and hundreds of tanks, artillery and trucks carrying long-range, nuclear-capable missiles.

"On this joyful and solemn occasion, all the peoples across the nation feel extremely proud for the progress and development of the motherland and have full confidence in the bright prospects for the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation," Hu said in a short speech standing atop Tiananmen gate with the rest of the collective leadership looking on.

Behind the celebrations is the tremendous change of fortunes China has experienced. China has gone from poor and internationally weak when the communists took over on October 1, 1949, to the world's third-largest economy and new power whose input the US superpower seeks to solve the global economic crisis and Iran's nuclear challenge.

Unmentioned during the event and crescendo of state media hype in recent weeks were the ruinous campaigns of revolutionary leader Mao Zedong that left tens of millions dead - as well as the country's current challenges: a widening gap between rich and poor, rampant corruption, severe pollution and ethnic uprisings in the western areas of Tibet and Xinjiang.

The spectacle seemed to follow on the stunning opening ceremony for the Beijing Olympics a year ago. An evening gala on Tiananmen Square later on Thursday featured thousands of performers singing and dancing for nearly two hours while dramatic bursts of multicoloured fireworks erupted in the background.

The show, like the Olympics ceremony, was choreographed by film director Zhang Yimou. The fireworks, including an depiction of China's railway to Tibet using trails of erupting gunpowder on a seven-story high hanging screen, were designed by the prominent contemporary artist Cai Guoqiang.



--C3--

China celebrations recall another era

BBC News, Beijing 

After a 60-gun salute, 8,000 troops of the People's Liberation Army goose-stepped through Tiananmen Square in celebration of 60 years of a communist China.

Above the Gate of Heavenly Peace, President Hu Jintao watched the military spectacle, standing on the spot where Mao Zedong announced the establishment of the People's Republic in 1949. 

Mr Hu said socialism had saved China, and thanked the PLA and the People's Armed Police Force, the guarantors of Communist rule, for safeguarding national security.

A new, modern China was standing up and facing the world, he said, but this ceremony felt as if it came from another era - Mr Hu rode in a vintage Red Flag limousine wearing a Chairman Mao-style tunic.

Greeting the troops as comrades, he commanded them to serve the people. Then the world's largest standing army put on a show. 

Communist kitsch

The Second Artillery Force sped by with five types of missiles, some so large that the ground rumbled underfoot. 

At the 50th anniversary a decade ago, 24,000 soldiers took part in the celebrations. This time, only 8,000 marched past. The emphasis has shifted from manpower to technology.

Some 52 weapons systems, including unmanned aircraft, tanks and missiles were on display, most of which had never been seen before. As each passed by, the official commentator marvelled at how most had been developed in China.

Then came a flypast of 150 military planes and helicopters. The modest display was perhaps an indication that China still lags behind the West in home-grown aircraft technology. 

Later, a pageant of floats celebrated China's successes.

This was pure communist kitsch, but the hand-picked crowd were thrilled to see Zhai Zhigang, the first Chinese "taikonaut" to walk in space, waving at them from a mock-up of his Shenzhou 7 spacecraft.

And no review of Chinese history is complete these days without reference to last year's Beijing Olympics.

Liu Xiang, the hurdler who disappointed his country by failing to compete in last year's Games, appears to have been forgiven. The crowd waved and cheered as he passed.

False note

Then it was the turn of China's regions and provinces.

Shanghai's float was dominated by the China Pavilion, the centrepiece of next year's World Expo.

Tibet's display featured a large screen with images of happy Tibetans, although it was not clear whether the people on the float were ethnic Tibetans or, as is often the case, Han Chinese dressed in local costumes. 

Ethnic harmony is a theme of President Hu's leadership, and it took a central role in the day's celebrations.

Around Tiananmen Square, 56 red lacquer columns represented each of China's ethnic minorities.

However, following the riots in Tibet last year, and then in Xinjiang earlier this year, those claims of national harmony struck a false note.

The Communist Party of China (CCP) is happy to take the credit for the country's transformation, but slow to own up to its mistakes.

Millions died during the Great Famine, while hundreds of thousands were persecuted during the Cultural Revolution. The party has still to apologise - a giant portrait of Mao led the parade.

And now, as before, the ruling Communists deal ruthlessly with any challenge to their authority.

Even for these celebrations, nothing was being left to chance - there was tight security everywhere.

Away from choreography in Tiananmen Square, armed police patrolled empty streets.

Locals in Beijing were told to stay at home - this celebration of the founding of the People's Republic, the police said, should be enjoyed on television. 

--C4--

China Celebrates 60 Years of Achievement Under Communist Rule
By Stephanie Ho
Beijing
01 October 2009

China has showcased its military capabilities, as well as its economic and social progress, in a huge parade to mark the 60th anniversary of the Communist state.

A troop of young women sang "Happy Birthday" to their homeland, in honor of the 60th anniversary of the day Chairman Mao Zedong declared the founding of modern China from Tiananmen Gate.

China's current leader, Hu Jintao, wore what has come to be called a Mao suit. His colleagues, and past leaders, all dressed in Western suits.

President Hu stood in an open-topped Red Flag limousine to review the troops. Then, he stood in the same place as Mao on the Tiananmen Gate, to pay tribute to all the achievements that brought China to where it is today.

Mr. Hu says "long live the great People's Republic of China, the great Chinese Communist Party and the great Chinese people."

He also adds that China will maintain a policy of peace and develop friendly cooperation with all nations.

His words were meant to allay any fears conjured up by Thursday's hour-long show of China's military strength. After Mr. Hu's speech, thousands of soldiers marched past - many of them escorting military hardware.

The highlights were several new missiles, including a ballistic missile that can carry a nuclear warhead and another one that has been nicknamed the "aircraft carrier killer." China also showcased new mobile radar units, unmanned drones and helicopters - equipment state-run TV announcers said would be useful for the "new information-based environment."

Floats celebrating developments in areas such as agriculture, industry and science followed the military procession. Each of China's provinces, autonomous regions and special administrative regions contributed a float. There was even a float to represent Taiwan, a separately governed island that China claims as its territory.

Tens of thousands of people, waving brightly colored fans or flowers, surrounded the floats or marched on their own. Performers wearing ethnic costumes danced and sang to show harmony. Thousands of children came at the end of the parade, to represent hopes for China's future.

Across Beijing, residents tried to carry on with their lives, despite the parade's extensive disruptions to traffic. Twenty-two year-old groom Shen Wei said it is more joyful to have his wedding on this day.

Shen says he and his bride, Tan Yue, especially picked the date because it is China's National Day.

Official media say there are tens of thousands of couples around the country who are taking advantage of the auspicious date to get married.

And for all Thursday's celebrations - big and small - the skies in Beijing were clear and blue, a striking departure from the heavy fog of a day earlier. 


--C5--

Australian PM congratulates China on 60th anniversary
www.chinaview.cn 2009-10-01 22:44:36 

 CANBERRA, Oct. 1 (Xinhua) -- Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd sends his warm congratulation to China and the Chinese people on the 60th anniversary of the People's Republic of China.

    "I would like to warmly congratulate China and its people on the 60th anniversary of the People's Republic of China." said Rudd as written in a Chinese press release from the PM's office Wednesday.

    "China has registered huge achievements in the past 60 years through hard work and high resolution and lifted hundreds of millions of people above poverty line." he said.

    Noting that China has opened up and is embracing the world, Rudd said "it has become nowadays a major drive for global economic increase and a key participant in dealing with international challenges such as global financial crisis and climate change."

    He said Australia and China share a profound and solid foundation in bilateral relations based on mutual benefit and mutual respect.

    "Since the ground-breaking diplomatic relations established in 1972, we are pleased to see Australia becoming an important partner of China with our trading relations and investment developing at notable pace and civil exchanges in education and culture increasing with each passing day."

    Pleased to see that the people to people exchanges between Australia and China have been increasing constantly, he said bilateral cooperation has also recorded fast development. "Under the multilateral regimes such as G20, Australia and China are addressing to global concerns with joint efforts where the two have many common interests."

    "I believe the close relations between us will grow constantly." said Rudd. 

Editor: Mu Xuequan 








